# C# Targets and Ports of the ANTLR Tool and StringTemplate

Documentation
The latest version of the CSharp2 and CSharp3 target documentation is located at the following link:
Visual Studio and the ANTLR C# Target
While the document focuses on Visual Studio 2010, everything except section 1.1 can be applied to Visual Studio 2008. Also, this document is currently limited to instructions for setting up a Visual Studio project to work with the CSharp2 or CSharp3 target, along with descriptions of a few substantial features unique to the C# targets.
Releases
Depending on your particular needs, several packages are available for each release. The packages are compressed with 7-zip.
Runtime: This package includes Antlr3.Runtime.dll. Generated grammars using the CSharp2 or CSharp3 targets depend on this assembly, so you'll need to ship it with your application.
Bootstrap: This package includes everything necessary to generate and execute grammars using the CSharp2 or CSharp3 targets in a Visual Studio project. This package includes the C# port of the ANTLR tool for generating grammars, but no other language targets are included. This package does not include StringTemplate 3. If your grammar uses the output=template; option, you will need to download the ST3 release as well.
Tool: This package includes the C# port of the ANTLR tool, plus templates for generating code for any supported language target.
Source: This package includes the source code for the shared CSharp2/CSharp3 target runtime, as well as the source for the C# ports of the ANTLR Tool and StringTemplate.
ST3: This package contains the binaries for StringTemplate 3, including the required CSharp3 runtime and symbol files for the binaries.
ST4: This package contains the binaries for StringTemplate 4, including the required CSharp3 runtime and symbol files for the binaries.
 
Runtime
Bootstrap
Tool
Source
ST3
ST4
CSharp2/CSharp3 Runtime (Antlr3.Runtime.dll)
X
X
X
 
X
X
C# Port of Tool (Antlr3.exe)
 
X
X
 
 
 
CSharp2 Target for Tool
 
X
X
 
 
 
CSharp3 Target for Tool
 
X
X
 
 
 
MSBuild integration for the CSharp3 target
 
X
X
 
 
 
C# Port of StringTemplate 3 (Antlr3.StringTemplate.dll)
 
 
 
 
X
 
C# Port of StringTemplate 4 (Antlr4.StringTemplate.dll)
 
X
X
 
 
X
Other Targets for Tool
 
 
X
 
 
 
Symbol Files (*.pdb)
X
 
X
 
X
X
Source Code
 
 
 
X
 
 
Latest Stable Release
The latest release is 3.5.0.2 (ANTLR 3) which includes StringTemplate 4.0.7.1, released on 18 March 2013. This release matches the official (Java) versions of ANTLR 3.5 and StringTemplate 4.0.7. When using this version, grammars should be generated by the C# port of the ANTLR Tool (Antlr3.exe). When the Java version of the tool is used to generate code for the CSharp2 or CSharp3 target (including automatic generation support in ANTLRWorks 1.5), the resulting code is untested and may not work.
antlr-dotnet-csharpruntime-3.5.0.2.7z
antlr-dotnet-csharpbootstrap-3.5.0.2.7z
antlr-dotnet-tool-3.5.0.2.7z
antlr-dotnet-st3-3.5.0.2.7z
antlr-dotnet-st4-4.0.7.1.7z
Source code (GitHub)
Visual Studio 2010 Extensions
The following are links to the Visual Studio 2010 extensions for editing ANTLR grammars and StringTemplate templates. Additional information and screenshots of these extensions can be found in the documentation at the top of this page.
ANTLR Language Support
StringTemplate 4 Language Support
Latest Preview Release
There is no newer preview release available at this time.
